TIME MANAGEMENT FOR MANAGERS
1. INTRODUCTION
Time management is a skill critical skill that can make or break any manager.This cousre covers management in three sections :- 
a) Managing people which include how we handle meetings, delegate others and train them. 
b)Time management for projects which tells about allocating resources and holding others accountable for meeting or beating deadlines.
c)Time management for our priorities which tells us how to quickly adjust to changing workplace demans, as well as making time for yourself so that we can be an effective leader.
 2. MANAGING PEOPLE
As a manager, we must be effective at not only our own time management, but also the time management of others. This can be achieved by delegation that is to ask someone to something and follow up with them about it. Our ability to effectively delegate and follow through with others can make or break us as a manager. The four-step system for delegation is
a)Why :  helping someone understand the motivation behind something that should be done we show respect for them. We show them that we care about them, and we want them to be involved in the process.
b)What : what do we hope to achieve? What is the end result? We want to have clear description of the outcome. 
c)Who: Sometimes tasks are failed to be completed because we didn't clearly designate who is to be responsible. 
d)When : When is the due date by which something should be accomplished? If a project requires them to complete something by a certain time, we can give them the deadline.
By following this simple process,  more effective delegation can be achieved.
2.1 Establish 1:1 meetings
What the hammer is to a carpenter, the one-to-one meeting is to a manager. . It's a pattern that we establish where we meet with people on a regular basis to handle every quick question. We should sit down with the person we manage and have a conversation with them to establish a pattern of when these meetings should occur. We should stick to the schedule of these meetings .
Establish another meeting schedule for the next person that we manage and so on. As manager, our job is to get results through other people. One-to-one meetings are how we will help others get those results.
2.3 Manage Response Expectations







