INTRODUCTION
Welcome
- As a manager, it's your responsibility to stay on top of not just your own time management, but also the time management of those around you. Time management is a critical skill that can make or break any manager. In this course we'll cover how time management affects you in three areas. First, managing people, which includes how you handle meetings, how you delegate to others, and train them. Next, we'll cover time management for your projects, including allocating your resources and holding others accountable for meeting or beating deadlines.

And finally, we'll address time management for your priorities, including how to quickly adjust to changing workplace demands, as well as making time for yourself so that you can be an effective leader. We'll cover all this and plenty more in Time Management for Managers.
know before watch
- All the viewers are welcome to go through Time Management for Managers. You'll find something here for you regardless of the position that you're in. However, I strongly recommend that you treat this as a supplement to my course called Time Management Fundamentals. This means that if you've already completed Time Management Fundamentals, feel free to dive right in and add it to what you've already learned. If you've not yet completed it, you can go through this course now and then later schedule time to complete Time Management Fundamentals.

The two, together, will help you create a complete time management system for yourself as a manager. The principles that I'm going to cover apply to anyone in a leadership position. Even if your job description doesn't specifically say manager, you can still find lots of valuable tips for your position, especially if you're hoping to advance into a managerial position someday. I recommend you learn and practice these principles starting now.
MANAGING PEOPLE
- What does management mean to you? In my work with coaching managers and helping CEOs develop their managers and leaders, I've come up with a definition that makes sense to me. Management is getting results through other people. This means that it's your job to help others grow in their position, not to do it for them. Think of it like being a weightlifting coach. Would the person that you're coaching get strong if you stepped in and did all the bench presses for them? Of course not.

We need to step back, and let others do the work, as we guide them and help them. This means that as a manager, you must be effective at not only your own time management, but also the time management of others. The most basic form of getting results through other people is delegation, meaning we ask someone to do something and we follow up with them about it. Your ability to effectively delegate and follow through with others can make or break you as a manager.

To help you better manage your time and theirs as well, let's explore a simple four-step system that you can use for delegation. The steps are why, meaning the motivation, what, meaning the result, who, meaning the person responsible, and when, meaning the due date. We begin with why, because by helping someone understand the motivation behind something that should be done we show respect for them. We show them that we care about them, and we want them to be involved in the process.

For example, if we're asking them to do research on a potential client, we take a brief moment to explain why this research is essential to the larger project, and how it will help us get more business. By what, we mean, what do we hope to achieve? What is the end result? We want to have clear description of the outcome. Again, using that example of the research, we detail that we're looking for a 500-word summary of the company's activities over the last eight years with links to at least three different sources.

The more specific we can be with describing the result, the more likely we are to achieve the result that we're looking for. Who is fairly straightforward, yet all too often, tasks are failed to be completed because we didn't clearly designate who is to be responsible. We want to ask people by name to do specific things, and also have them agree to do it. And then finally, the when. When is the due date by which something should be accomplished? If a project requires them to complete something by a certain time, you can give them the deadline.

In the absence of a hard deadline, however, I find it's more effective to ask the other person what due date can you meet? What is appropriate for you? In that way, they are choosing and they are making the commitment. So, whenever we delegate to someone, we follow the system, why, what, who, and when. Yet, from a time management perspective, our job isn't done yet. Then we need to capture an action item, a note for ourself with the answers to these questions.

For instance, if I delegated to someone to complete this research, I'm going to send myself a quick action reminder. What is the end result? Who is going to complete it? And when are they going to complete it? Bob will complete the 500-word research task by Tuesday at three o'clock. I jot all this down, and send myself a note that I'm waiting for it. By the way, Time Management Fundamentals graduates will recognize this as putting the note into an approved gathering point.

Later, when I see this note, I'll process it by creating a reminder for myself that I'm waiting for that person to complete it. Usually, I want that reminder to occur at the day after it was due. So, it was due Thursday at three o'clock, I'd create a reminder for myself Friday morning. When the reminder comes up, if Bob hadn't completed the report by then, I'd follow up with him to find out what got in the way. By following this simple process, you'll begin the journey toward more effective delegation.
ESTABLISH meetings
- Interruptions are a massive productivity killer in the workplace. These switches in attention can chew up at least 28% of your day. That's an entire work week every single month. I've found the most common source of these switches in attention come from quick questions. I call them the dreaded double Q. You're working on your email and someone calls and says, "I'm sorry, I've got just a quick question." Or they knock on your door and they say, "Just a quick question." These little, quick questions are important, yet, most of us are handling them in an inefficient way.

How can we handle all these quick questions, yet still be polite and responsive as a manager? What the hammer is to a carpenter, the one-to-one meeting is to a manager. It's a pattern that we establish where we meet with people on a regular basis to handle every quick question. Think of one person that you manage, someone that you have the most questions for and they have the most questions for you. Now, how often should we meet with that person? It depends, but just start with the general idea of one meeting per week at 25 minutes per meeting.

That five minutes that we're leaving out of a full half hour gives you time to transition to the next meeting. Now think about your interactions with that person who you chose. One meeting per week at 25 minutes per meeting. Would that work? If it doesn't, do we need to meet a little less often but have slightly longer meetings? Maybe once per week for 50 minutes per meeting. Or do we need to meet more often with slightly shorter meetings? Perhaps two times per week at 10 minutes per meeting.

Sit down with that person you manage and have a conversation with them to establish a pattern of when these meetings should occur. Set it up in both of your calendars to become a recurring schedule. It's critical that you stick to this schedule. If you stick to it, they'll know that they can count on having your full attention at those times, and they'll queue up those quick questions until then. However, if you miss those meetings or treat them as less important, then your team member will likely go back to interrupting you again.

Now, what happens during these one-to-one meetings? At the most basic form, it's letting them ask you all of their quick questions, and then you ask them all of your quick questions. That's it. This one meeting will go a long way toward reducing the number of switches in attention that are taking place in your work day. If you want a lot more detail in what to do in these one-to-one meetings, you might want to check out my course on leading productive one-to-one meetings here in the library.

Once you do set up the schedule with that one person, complete the process again. Establish another meeting schedule for the next person that you manage and so on. Remember, as a manager, your job is to get results through other people. One-to-one meetings are how you'll help others get those results.
Manage response Expectation
- The 18th century poet Alexander Pope once wrote, "Blessed is the man who expects nothing, "for he shall never be disappointed." In our modern workplace certainly we need to expect a little bit more than nothing. However, let me suggest a slight alteration to this phrase. "Blessed is the manager who sets reasonable expectations, "for they shall never be disappointed." Issues and conflict between people in today's workplace often come from a lack of clear expectations.

Many companies are addicted to what I call the Culture of Now. It's the idea that if I ask a question I expect the answer now! And if you don't respond to the email I sent now, then I'm going to send you a text message now. And if you don't respond to that text message, then I'm going to call you now, and so on and so on. This creates a lot of switches in attention and huge gaps in efficiency. Instead I suggest that companies move to a Culture of When. This means that you will respond to all questions, and this is when you're going to do it.

You do it in an orderly manner. As a manager, you're able to help create a Culture of When for your team. For example, if anything gets delegated we create a clear when for that person: When it should it be delivered. And we create a clear when for ourselves in terms of when we're going to follow up with them. If anyone interrupts us during the day and we've already established a one-to-one meeting schedule with them we can ask "Can this wait until our next one-to-one meeting?" It helps shift people's expectations from now to when.

Here are four areas of communication to consider when it comes to creating expectations for your team. What I'm going to share with you are suggestions, not doctrine. Take what I share and then have a conversation with your team about what expectations really work in your environment. First, face-to-face requests. Our expectation can be that face-to-face should mostly be used for established meetings and that we schedule an extra meeting if we need to discuss something that's going to take longer than a one-to-one.

We can use face-to-face in the case of an emergency, obviously, like the building is on fire and everyone needs to leave. Next are phone calls. Phone calls are often reserved just for meetings. Otherwise, we'll have the expectation that we'll return the call within 24 hours. Now be careful about using the phone in general. You want to avoid playing phone tag, going back and forth. It's why I recommend that you either use the phone only for pre-established meetings, or you use it to leave voicemail messages, which are often more expressive than other forms of communication.

Now what about your email expectations? Typically email is the primary form of communication in a business. Let's use email for things like specific questions with three or less bullet points, with an expected response time of two to three business days. And finally, text messages or a messaging app. I believe texts should only be used for urgent, ultra-brief requests. This means that we have one question where we want one piece of information that's holding everything up and we know that it's urgent.

In that case, we can text someone. However, this channel should only be reserved for these urgent requests and used sparingly. Again, how you choose to use these four methods of communication is up to you and your team. By establishing expectations well in advance, you'll help smooth out the flow of communication and improve efficiency.
Focus on Humans
- In my book, The Myth of Multitasking, I talk about the three negative effects that happen when we attempt to multitask in our work. Things take longer, we make more mistakes, and we increase our stress levels. However, there is also a fourth effect that occurs when we attempt to multitask on a human being. To illustrate this effect, I recommend you do this activity in an upcoming meeting with your team. Have people pair up. One person will talk to the other person for 30 seconds about a hobby or something that they enjoy.

Then, switch roles, but this time, for the person who's listening, have them multitask on the other person, so they're playing with their phone, or they're shuffling their papers while the other person is talking to them about something that they like. At the end of that activity ask those who were just speaking to describe in one word, how did that make you feel to be multitasked upon? When I do this in my seminars around the world, the one word I hear consistently is "Unimportant." Now imagine, if you started your day, you walked into your office, and you saw a team member, and you said, "Hi, you're unimportant.

"What are you going to work on today?" None of us would ever dream of doing that, yet when you multitask on the people that you manage, that's exactly what you're communicating to them. As a manager, it's your job to get results through other people, which means the quality of the relationships that you build are vital to your productivity and your time management. Some move so fast and get so caught up in being so busy that they fail to give attention when team members make requests.

Effective managers recognize that team members need their attention and their time. They're never moving too fast that they're not there to listen to someone else. I recommend that you make the commitment that when you're dealing with a human being, especially someone that you manage, never ever multitask on them. Focus 100% and give them your attention. This means that if you're on a phone call or a meeting, you remove anything that could be a potential distraction.

This includes turning all of your devices to vibrate or airplane mode or even better, completely off. Do whatever it takes to make sure that when you're talking with another person, it's uninterrupted time. Now, what if you're in a situation where you're working on something, and you genuinely are engaged in it, and then a team member interrupts you. In that situation, politely negotiate a new expectation of your availability. You can say something like, "I'm focusing on something "right now, but I do have free time on my schedule "in about 15 minutes, would that work for us to talk then?" Not only will this help the other person feel respected because you're going to give them full attention, but it helps them learn the importance of moving out of the ever-persistent culture of now to a much more reasonable culture of when.

When we focus on others, we don't lose time, we aren't slowing our productivity. The reverse is true. We gain increased productivity and loyalty from each person because they feel that we care, and they will care more in return.
Set a positive Example
- I believe in the leader's mirror. The leader's mirror is the idea that the organization is the reflection of its leader. Your team is reflection of you. When you see positive things in your team, odds are; there are positive things that you yourself are doing; if you see areas for improvement in your team, odds are, these are areas that you personally need to improve upon, as well. This means that if you and I want your team to do a better job of meeting deadlines and showing up on time and staying on top of eon, everything that's expected of them in terms of time management; then the most important thing we can do is to make sure you are doing those things yourself.

Keep in mind, I'm not talking about perfection. None of us are perfect in everything and few are perfect in anything. However, we can make progress. Let's make our focus on progress, not perfection. The interesting thing about managers is, well, they have managers themselves. You have someone that you report to. I'd suggest you go to that person and ask them to help you in the areas that you want to improve.

Let them now that you're going through this course and ask them to go through it with you and even more importantly, hold you accountable for the principles that you're learning here. Many people complain that they go to a seminar. They read a book and they get excited about it, but then they fail to follow through. The reason why most fail to follow through and improve is because they lack accountability to a third party. By trusting your manager or your leader to help you with this, your likelihood of improvement will increase.

There are three areas I suggest you focus on when it comes to setting a positive example. They're fairly simple, yet deserve attention in your day. First of all, meetings. Show up on time, start on time and on time or early. Come prepared, guest as you expect your team members to do. Second, follow up; whenever you delegate a task to someone else, create a reminder for yourself that you are going to follow up with them.

The more that you follow up with people, the more people will understand that delivering assignments on time is important to you. Finally, deadlines; this is for yourself. Meet or beat the deadlines that you set. Set deadlines that you know you can achieve. Underpromise and overdeliver isn't just a good catchphrase for sales; it applies to management, as well. The single most important rule of success in management and really anything else is to do what you say you will do when you say you will do it.

By focusing on making progress each week, your example will inspire others to become more themselves.
Invest in Training others
- Investing in others and helping them grow is vital to your productivity and efficiency as a manager. Have you ever caught yourself thinking something like this? "By the time I train them to do this, "I could have done it myself." This mindset gets you stuck in forever doing things yourself. It will suck your clock dry of every single minute you have because you run around and put out the fires that other people create. This is not management. Managing is getting results through others.

So we must teach others to perform better and to become leaders themselves. If you do that, it will save tremendous amounts of time in your day. Here are a few areas to consider. First, learn with the intent to teach. When you go through a course like this, avoid thinking just about yourself and what you are getting out of it. Instead, learn what the idea of having to teach it to someone else, then after learning, teach a little bit of it to someone else.

I'm not saying that they should go through this course themselves, but first, you take the opportunity to teach them a few key ideas, and then encourage them to go through the course to learn more. This helps both of you. Them, because as a manager you cared enough about them to help them learn, and it helps you because the best way to learn something is through teaching to someone else. Second, give them time to learn. This means providing a consistent weekly schedule that allows for an hour or two of training for each of your team members.

Whether they go through an online course such as this, or whether you're helping them personally, both of these have great value as long as you have time budgeted for career development. By scheduling this in advance as a recurring appointment, it won't seem so much as a distraction as a necessity. Number three, embrace repetition. We see the greatest musicians, who we admire their success and their ability to do amazing things with music, yet they only got to that point through hours and hours of repetitive practice with the same music, with the same instrument, with the same passages over and over and over again.

We all understand that this is a principle of success, yet for some reason when we get into business we think that we don't live by those same rules. We believe that simply if we tell a team member to do something one time, they should do it right from that moment forward forever and ever. No, we all need the power of repetition. Don't be afraid to demonstrate how to do something, and then practice it with an employee, and then observe them as they go through that, and then repeat the process again.

It may feel like a waste of time, particularly if you're caught up in the mindset of being busy. However, if you slow down and repeat the training, spending 30 minutes of repetitive practice now with a team member will likely save you 30 hours of cleaning up messes over the next year. The investment you make in helping your team members learn is well worth the time and the effort. When it comes to scheduling time in your calendar, training should be a top priority.
MANAGING PROJECTS
Cordinate multiple Projects
- On a personal level, time management is fairly straightforward. Tasks line up, you schedule time to complete them, and you repeat. If you just have one project that you're working on at any given time, the rules are essentially the same. However, if you're a manager with responsibility for multiple, simultaneous projects, then time management takes on a whole new level of complexity. We need to adapt. For detailed training in project management, there are a variety of valuable courses here in the library.

In this video, I'll cover tips that are focused on the time management aspect of project management. Tip one, prioritize the big picture. Priority is a function of time and that means we need to establish a priority in advance based upon due dates, based upon the calendar. Let's say that we have three different projects that we're being asked to complete. This means we need to have a conversation with our supervisors and ask what is the expected deadline for each.

Also, I recommend asking, "When is the absolute latest that this needs to get done?" They're really two different questions. Sometimes people provide an initial due date that has a built-in cushion, a soft deadline. However, as a manager, you want to know exactly what the hard deadline is so you can plan to meet or beat it for each project. By knowing which projects truly need to be completed first, you'll be able to prioritize your time and completion better.

Tip two, map them out. In time management fundamentals, I talk about focusing on just the first step or the first minute of activity but when juggling multiple projects, we need to take time to map out the entire process. We want to see in detail every single step that we're going to need to take to bring the project to completion. There are a variety of software programs that can help you with this. I recommend using one that includes a Gantt chart feature, which shows how all the steps overlap with each other and it provides an adjustable time frame for when your projects are going to be complete.

Tip three, communicate more frequently. In a multiple project situation, it's easy for people to get lost in the black hole of being busy. As a manager, you can't afford for this to happen. Information is your friend. You may want to consider holding a quick standing meeting of 10 to 15 minutes with the entire team once or twice a week. You may also want to incorporate a software solution that allows people to quickly and easily send you a daily report.

Both of these reporting tools are supplements to the recurring one-to-one meetings you should have with every team member. Most of all, budget time in your calendar each day to review and digest all of this information. It's only as powerful as the time you allot to review it. Finally, we want to think about creating a system. If we're going to continually do these kinds of projects, we want to discuss with the company ways to systemize everything, how to make a repeatable workflow process.

By using a consistent system, it will save us hours and hours of time in the long run because we don't need to reinvent the wheel. Let's figure out what software programs we're going to use, and what tools we'll have to make sure that project management processes flow smoothly. By pre-establishing these systems, we'll save significant amounts of time.
Allocate Scarce Resources
- As a manager, part of your job is to allocate, or distribute, scarce resources. What are these resources? Well, they include the time of your people, and yourself. Perhaps even meeting rooms. They include your budget, in terms of money, and perhaps, production materials. And they include tools, such as software, computers, or machinery. When it comes to using specific software tools for tracking resources in your company, I recommend that you go through the associated tutorials, here on the library.

However, in this video, I want to cover three general principles to help managers stay on top of these resources. Principle number one, is live within your means. We want to keep expectations realistic. We understand that principle, when it comes to money, on a personal level, right? When we go into debt with money, we must repay that money with interest. It always costs us more when we go into debt.

Well, the same is true with time. If we go into debt, timewise, by over-committing the resources we have available, thinking that we can accomplish more in a short period of time, we end up with the opposite results: we accomplish less, taking far too long a period of time. By under-committing, by living within our means, we'll find it far easier to meet, or beat, deadlines. Interruptions, and stoppages, are bound to occur in our work day.

By avoiding being stretched to the limit, we'll be prepared for them. This means that your target, when it comes to resource allocation, is 90%, or less. 100%, maximum usage, is not ideal. And it's not realistic. If we see an employee has eight hours to work on a project, and we, as their manager, allocate all of those eight hours, we're going to be in a world of hurt (chuckles) if, all of a sudden, they get sick for a few hours.

Instead, by leaving a little bit more breathing room, we'll make it more likely that we complete things on time. Number two, is to assess, and reassess, our capacity. In the same spirit, that we have to know how much time we're spending on these things, each week, you'll want to budget time in your calendar to review where everyone and everything is, in terms of their capacity. If you don't have a software program that automatically tracks time, you'll want to spend a little bit of your time each week, asking questions of each team member.

Find out how full they are. Look at the other projects that are happening. Using your resource management tool, update it regularly, to maintain an accurate picture. Principle three, is communicate with your leaders. As you see issues arise, with capacity in your project, create reminders for yourself to follow up with, and communicate with, your leader in one of your one-to-one meetings. Don't be afraid to tell them what you see.

Are there potential issues in meeting deadlines? Perhaps, do we need to find ways to improve, or boost, capacity? When you present your findings to your leaders, come from a standpoint of, this is what I'm seeing, and here's what I recommend, do you agree? Make this a back-and-forth dialogue, where you both work together, to come up with a solution. Live within your means when it comes to your resources, and you'll find your team's productivity is far greater than when they are stretched to the limit.
Establish Project Deadlines
- At the beginning of every project is a decision that can make or break its long-term success. The date you set for completion is critical, because it establishes expectations for everyone. Yet, perhaps not surprisingly, the date and the expectation we set is perhaps the most common area where errors occur. And an error, here, has significant consequences. In this video, I want to cover two areas where you can have more success in establishing project deadlines: discussion, and scheduling.

First, let's talk about the discussion. When we're having a conversation about the deadline, view it from the perspective of the other person. Your supervisor, your boss, even the person you're managing. Consider their viewpoint, especially by exploring the 'why' behind the project. It's been said that with people we respect, we tell them why a thing should be done. Yet with people we don't respect, we simply tell them what to do. By taking the time to explore the reason why we're doing this project, and taking the time to ask questions about why certain deadlines are important, we'll be prepared to answer those questions of those that we manage.

We'll be able to speak positively about the deadline decision when it's made. We want your team, and everyone, to be on the same page. Also, take time to help others view it from your perspective. Make them aware of any issues you might foresee. It's better to be candid now, in the beginning, rather than just say yes, and regret it a month from now. Which leads to the next principal about discussion: be realistic. We want to ask, can or should it be slower? Should the deadline be pushed off? In my coaching, I often ask clients to set a deadline for their own projects, and I found that most people over-commit.

It's perhaps a natural human tendency of us to people-please. When that happens, I ask my clients a question like this, and you're welcome to use or modify this question. Are you sure about that date? Are you considering potential obstacles such as A, B, or C? Use questions rather than telling someone that you see there's a problem with their deadline. By using questions, you'll help them explore possible solutions, and also highlight any potential obstacles.

Do it with the mindset of being helpful, and working together, rather than just poking holes in the date. If you come from a place of helping, others will feel that you have their best interest at heart. Let's move on to scheduling the project. After we've chosen a date, we want to establish this date in everyone's calendar. For anyone who's involved in the project, we want to create an appointment. Something like project xyz is to be delivered on November 12th.

Then, let's cut that date in half. So if the project is due six months from now, create an appointment three months from now stating what we'll deliver on that date. Then, do it again. Figure out what your team will deliver in one-and-a-half months, and put it in everyone's calendar. This is a very simplified approach to taking a very large project and breaking it down into bite-size milestones and deliverables.

Certainly, there are going to be more complexities involved that you'll want to consider. What I've shared is simply the starting point. To make it easier for everyone to visualize the project, and the steps, as we complete them, even for those who don't have a background in project management. In this way, we can take a very complex project and break it down into easy-to-understand, bite-sized achievements.
Hold others Accountable for deadline
- If management is getting results through other people, then that means that as managers, we're going to spend a lot of time following up to make sure others are getting those results, especially when it comes to deadlines. I want to share with you a process that my coaching clients have found effective when it comes to following up with others. First, let's recap just a few steps that you need to take when delegating to someone else. Number one, when delegating, create clear deadlines. Number two, create a reminder for yourself and put that reminder into an approved gathering point.

Then three, set that reminder to occur after the time it was due, typically the day after. Now, if the person that you've got something delegated to got it done on time, then you feel relief, right? Your only follow-up may be to say thank you. But what if they didn't complete the task? What if they didn't meet the deadline? The first thing to keep in mind? Don't be surprised. While not professional behavior, this in, in fact, fairly normal, especially for new employees who aren't used to working within a deadline.

Most people struggle with time management. Here's a powerful question to put into your managerial tool belt. The question is, what got in the way? Now, you can word that however you want. Some people like to say what obstacle did you encounter, or what did you run into? However you say it, avoid asking why. Such as, why didn't you get this done? At least in the English language, 'why' has a very strong connotation of personal blame.

Instead, we want to shift the attention onto the system, the process, and what obstacles are in the way so that you can help your team member remove them. We want to work together to find a solution. Typically, when people fail to follow through it means they broke a system. The breakdown occurs somewhere along one of these five steps. Number one, they must have a time management system. If your employee doesn't have a time management system, this is a good time to suggest they go through time management fundamentals here on the library.

Otherwise, they're just going to repeat the same mistakes over and over. Number two, they must gather the assignment into a gathering point. This means they need to have a written note to themselves, or maybe they sent themselves an email or put it in the inbox. Number three, on a consistent basis, they need to process every item in that gathering point, meaning that they decided what, when and where to do with every item in that inbox.

Number four, during processing, they needed to have scheduled a specific time on their calendar or task reminder list to complete that task. And then number five, when the scheduled time arrived, they stuck to it and they followed through. They did it. Analyze those five steps with your team member. In which of the five steps did the breakdown occur? Once you pinpoint the obstacle, help them come up with a solution.

Then, reestablish a new due date with them, and again, create a reminder for yourself to follow through. In this way, as a manager, you become a helpful resource so that others learn to be more effective with their time management, and they succeed in their positions.
Communicate Changes in Deadline
- In even the best planned projects, we'll run into obstacles. When these arise, it's vital for everyone to be updated, and consider alternatives, or options we can take to get back on schedule. These are the moments when time management and communication intersect. You'll be able to stay more organized and efficient if you spend a little extra time coordinating and updating each other on a consistent basis. Here are a few areas to consider.

Regularly check in every meeting. Whenever you get together with team members, whether it's as a group or in a one-to-one, you'll want to briefly reassess and recommit to the deadline. Ask the team where they're at and ask if they foresee any problems. If you see any hesitation, avoid pushing through, or saying something like, "Can you make it happen?" This leads to overcommitment, and surprisingly missed deadlines. Rather ask them something like, "I see some hesitation.

"What obstacle do you see?" Then work with them to see if you can overcome those obstacles together. Encourage candid discussion. Let your team members know that when obstacles are encountered, they should bring them up immediately. Help them feel safe and comfortable to share this kind of information with you. Encourage them that whenever they see something like this happen, send you a message. Bring it up in a one-to-one meeting, or if needed, even schedule a special meeting to discuss potential delays.

The worst thing you and your team members can possibly do is to ignore these things when they occur. Part of your role as a manager is to help them work through these issues, and find a solution, so that you can get back on track with the timelines. Also, you'll want to notify your supervisors of potential conflicts. In the same way that you want your team members to be candid with you, communicate these issues with those who manage you and make them aware early.

The moment they occur. Whenever possible, use questions, not statements. Avoid presenting it to them in terms of, "We can't do it." No one wants to hear that. Instead, present it with a question. Sort of like, "Here's what we ran into. "I'm anticipating this may cause "a delay of X number of days. "Do you see any solutions to help us get back on track?" In this way, they can work together with you, and if a change in deadline needs to be made, it's their idea.

By regularly communicating and coordinating, you can increase the likelihood that projects meet or beat established deadlines.
Meeting time vs Working Time
- To this point in the course, we've mentioned several different meetings that you'll be engaged in. Group meetings, one-on-one meetings, and even special meetings to discuss unforeseen issues. However, you and your team also need to get actual work done. While meetings play a vital role in project completion and coordination, we also need to make sure there's plenty of time reserved for your team to be focused on working on the project. What is the right balance? You're essentially aiming for the 80/20 rule when it comes to your team members.

This means that most of their time, 80% of it, should be doing the work, and about 20% of their time or less should be in meetings. In a 40-hour work week that allots up to eight hours for meetings including transition time. So roughly six hours for meetings, and 15 minutes or so to transition mentally and physically out of each meeting. That's the max. The other 32 hours? Focused, getting it done, going to work.

On the other hand, you as the manager need a slightly different distribution. Now this depends on how many people you manage. But you're looking for roughly a 50/25/25 rule. What that means is 50% of your time may be in meetings. 25% of your time may be in developing systems and training for team members. And 25% is your work time, and that includes processing your email and possibly stepping in to assist when needed.

This is a rough estimate, but it gives you a starting point so you can begin to budget your week. Speaking of budgeting, it's best to schedule these meetings to occur around natural transition points in the day, such as the beginning or end of work. This will help us have less switching cost overall as we move between meetings and work. The next most effective time to schedule meetings are just before or just after lunch.

For example, meetings at the very beginning or the very end of the day have far less transition time than meetings held at three o'clock in the afternoon where you're going to have to stop work, go to the meeting, and then go back to work. Create an environment where you and your team members can get into a good rhythm of performance. Remember, their success is your success.
MANAGING PRIORITIES
More time to high priority task
- Have you ever heard of the Eisenhower Matrix? It's a little graph originally used by US President Dwight Eisenhower, and made popular by Stephen R. Covey. It's the idea that by looking at what's urgent versus not urgent. And important versus not important, you can decide what needs to be done. It was a great model in past decades, when we had an abundance of time very few interruptions and people had the luxury of sitting down and categorizing their tasks before performing them.

In our day however, the model has lost most of its value. Largely because the pace of information, and the rate of interruptions that we're assaulted with. Everything is urgent, and nearly everything screams important at us, right? The pace of life has essentially shoved us into a corner and seemingly limited our options. Time has suddenly become our enemy. If you ask people how they're doing, many will say I'm busy.

This is shorthand for everything in my life is coming at me at once and I can't keep up. I don't have enough time. Let me offer you the alternative that I've seen effective managers use. Make your highest priority to be those activities which give you more time. In other words, invest your time in things that will pay out time dividends in the long run. Sometimes I call this the bank of time.

Wise managers invest time using this prioritization process. And this time returns back to them, having earned massive amounts of time interest. Here are the four questions you want to ask, to use the bank of time. First, is there something repetitive that I can delegate to someone else? By doing this, you multiply the effects of your efforts and get more time back.

This includes not just looking at delegating to team members, but also enlisting the aid of assistants. Virtual or otherwise. Second, am I holding up the work of others? Never be the bottleneck. Make sure that other people can continue to work. If you need to quickly resolve an issue to get them working again, do it. Don't let one person's delay hold up many people. As a manager you must make keeping your team members moving and productive a top priority.

Third, can I create something that will work for me while I'm sleeping? In other words, create a process or invest in a tool that will give you more time with little effort on your part. Look for shortcuts, apps, tools, and software improvements, that pay you back in terms of saved hours. And finally, if you've exhausted all options to the questions above then ask, what activity is worth the most per hour? In time management fundamentals, I call these your MVAs or most valuable activities.

By focusing your time on that which is most valuable, you'll be in a better position to both help your company and more rapidly grow your career. By making investments in using this prioritization method, you can find that time is your friend. And you might even become a time tycoon.
Calender as Prioritzzation tool
- I recently spoke with a coaching client who remarked he didn't have enough time. He said, "I don't have enough bandwidth." However, what he really meant was, I don't have enough time over the next one to two weeks. Most people, when they feel that they have little bandwidth or available time, feel so because they're limiting their perspective to just the next couple of weeks. Yet, if you open up your calendar with the perspective that you have the next couple of years, suddenly you have an abundance of bandwidth.

As a manager, everything you deal with has a deadline. To meet or beat these deadlines, we need to expand your calendar by looking far ahead in your schedule. I believe that prioritization is nothing more nor less than a function of time. Whatever your top priority is, you should be doing right now. So your top priority is watching this course, right? Whatever is your lowest priority, you should push off as far as possible by scheduling in your calendar into the distant future.

This is what I call positive procrastination. Just pushing things off without scheduling them is negative procrastination. Using the calendar is what makes or breaks this system. Consider two examples of how to make this work. First, a team member asks you if it's time to do your annual review of their performance. This is something many managers are responsible for. You ask yourself, when is the latest I can reasonably do this review? In this situation, you believe it really doesn't need to be done for another six months, yet you know this employee is eager to get it, so you decide that 60 days from now is the latest you can do it without making the employee feel neglected.

You schedule the time. Then, you communicate your date for this one-time review, and set up the meeting. Also, you create an annually recurring schedule for ongoing employee reviews. You schedule that to occur during what is typically the slowest season of the year at work. That way we don't have to keep revisiting this question. In this case, we positively procrastinated. Example two. Someone on your teams sends you an urgent message letting you know that a vital client called in and has a serious complaint.

The latest you can take care of this is before the end of today's business day. You look ahead in your schedule, and because you've positively procrastinated other issues, there is still an hour of available time in your day. You schedule the time to resolve the issue in the afternoon at three. You also communicate with your team member or the client that you'll contact them around four and resolve this before the end of the day. Now, does this seem unrealistic? It may seem so if you've been in the habit of scheduling everything short-term.

However, if you open up your calendar, and begin scheduling further into the future, you'll naturally leave yourself these gaps of time to handle truly urgent issues. You'll be prepared when emergencies arrive.
Keep meeting action focoused
- Since so much of your time as a manager is spent in meetings, making sure meetings are effective is essential to your productivity, right? Yet, few of us think of meetings as productive. Why is that? I've found in my coaching that most managerial meetings fail to be productive because they fail to end with clear action. In other words, we talked about what to do. We had some valuable discussions, maybe even a person or two vaguely agreed we should do something about it.

Yet in the end, we lacked anything specific for us to follow up on. Or, perhaps even worse in my opinion, people did commit to an action, but no one followed up on it. It was just forgotten. As a manager, you want to make sure your meetings are always productive and always focused on specific, meaningful action. Action, then, becomes the most important part of the meeting. Here are some tips to make that happen.

First, reserve time at the beginning of each meeting for reporting. Review the notes from the last meeting, and check on each person who made a commitment, ensuring that they followed through. Second, be aware of any changes in subject during the meeting. Now it's natural for meetings to cover more than one topic. Whenever a shift in topic occurs, stop, and gather a specific action. I think of this like a mountain climber placing an anchor into the rock wall before moving farther up the cliff.

Before you proceed, anchor the conversation with a solid action. Third, when deciding on that action, ask the vital delegation questions. What specific action needs to be taken? Who will do it? And, when will it be done? If necessary, take a moment to discuss the why behind the action as well. Make sure everyone in the meeting is certain about the what, who, and when before moving forward.

Fourth, make a note of your answers. Put them into a gathering point you know you'll see and process later, such as a notepad or sending yourself an email. If you want help with this, you can also check out my course on leading productive meetings, which includes a template for meeting minutes. Fifth, process your notes using what, when, where processing which I described in Time Management Fundamentals, and create a reminder to follow up.

This means you're going to either schedule a calendar appointment with yourself or a task reminder that you're waiting for the person to report back. And finally, follow up. When the reminder pops up, make sure that you check in with the person at the appropriate time and ensure that they followed through. As you do this consistently, your team will recognize that you're holding them accountable, which, over time, should increase follow-through.

Follow these steps, and your team members will begin to feel that meetings are productive, essential, and action-focused.
Shift Priorities When needed
- What if emergencies happen, and despite your best planning, there just doesn't seem to be room to solve it. Let me say up front, that working longer hours should be the last resort. As a general rule, you should establish your work schedule and stick to it. This leads to better long run performance and decreased burn out. Working as long as it takes, is actually counter productive. It leads to inefficient decision making.

And misses opportunities to improve work flow. I'm not saying there are never times when it's necessary. I'm just saying that this is the last place you should look until all other options have been exhausted. So, what are the other options we should be exploring? First, hopefully you've been following what I've taught about positive procrastination. If you've been consistently pushing off lowest priority items far away in your calendar, you will have naturally built pockets of time, usually within one to two weeks out in the future, that are still available to handle higher priority instances.

My second tip builds on that. If you find that it's a regular occurrence for your team to experience set backs and interruptions, or emergencies, either because of the industry you're in or the customers you're working with. Then, as a wise manager, you'll want to make a habit of holding back some of your available time in reserve. Looking at your calendar and seeing a day that is packed full from start to finish, should be a rare exception.

In most cases, you'll want to regularly leave open chunks of time in your day when scheduling. This gives you buffer room to respond to emergencies when they happen. But what if that's not enough? What if you truly do have to start moving things around? Tip three is to move but not remove. In other words, if you have time scheduled to work on a lower priority item, and then something truly urgent comes in, you can move that lower priority item further into the future.

Again, using that magic question. When is the latest this can be done? Slide that appointment into the future. And move that higher priority emergency into it's place. And finally, after any emergency or significant schedule shift, do a postmortem. What occurred that caused this situation? Were you overly aggressive in how you scheduled tasks? Were there things that your team could have anticipated or could have mentioned in previous meetings? Rather than accepting a set back as part of the job, look for solutions to help prevent this from becoming a recurring issue.

The small amount of time you invest now in finding a solution will likely save you and your team a great deal of time in the future.

The priority of you
- To be an effective manager, you must also be an effective human being. This means creating a structure for your week that allows you to get into a healthy rhythm of work and taking care of yourself. Here are a few areas to consider. First, create your finish line. This is the boundary line for when work ends each day. Many managers are in salaried situations. This provides for a more flexible work schedule. However, flexibility doesn't mean that work is endless, nor that you are available to be interrupted at all hours.

When you create limitations in the hours you work, you force yourself to be more creative, to find solutions, and to improve the system and the tools that you're using in the workplace, not just throwing more working hours at a problem when something goes wrong. If necessary, you can have two finish lines. For example, if you manage staff overseas, you could work until the afternoon, then take a break for a few hours for family time and dinner, and then return to work for another few hours late in the evening, with a clear stop time.

Whatever you decide, there should always be a structure and protected times when you are not to be bothered. Also, let's not forget processing time in your week. In time management fundamentals, I recommend that the average person has about five hours per week for processing. Managers, depending on your situation, may require more, up to 10 hours per week. Processing is equal in value to the highest value thing you could possibly be doing.

Why? Because when used properly, it gives you more time. An hour spent on processing today can equal ten hours over the course of the next year. So make sure that you have a recurring schedule established for an appropriate amount of weekly processing. Your goal is to reach zero in each of your gathering points at least once per week. In other words, at one point during the week, your email inbox should reach zero.

If you're not hitting that target, adjustments may be necessary. Next, since a significant part of your managerial role is training and developing others, you're going to want to budget time to train and develop yourself as well. Consider for a moment, do you have a recurring weekly budget established for yourself to go through courses here on the library? Even thirty minutes a week will not only help you grow in your career, but will fill you with helpful knowledge that you can pass along to those you lead.

Finally, consider your personal health needs. No matter what position you have or what industry you're in, your body is the primary tool you use to accomplish work. It houses your mind, it moves you from place to place, it provides energy for new initiatives. Be sure that the schedule you establish for yourself weekly provides time for your body to eat healthily and get regular exercise. Giving attention to your personal needs isn't selfish.

In fact, self improvement is one of the best ways you can help and support those that you serve.
THe power of Having fun
- Recently, I completed work on my fourth book, The Power of Having Fun. The premise is that too many of us are working too hard, plowing forward, in the hopes that someday, hopefully, it will all be worth it in the end. However, if we carve just a little time in our schedule each day, to enjoy fun moments, not only will our work be worth it now, today, but our performance will improve, as well. Now this is a topic that would take a full course to cover, so I just want to provide a couple of simple tests for you to engage in as a manager.

This experiment is designed to help you improve your performance, and the performance of your team. First, plan small, fun breaks for yourself each day. Find something that you enjoy. Even if it's only for five to 15 minutes, and schedule it into your day. Make it a top priority to go for a walk, or watch a funny video, or listen to a favorite song. Me, I like to play a video game.

Protect that appointment like you would one with your boss or your best client. Treat it as sacred, and when the time comes, do it, and enjoy it. Now if you're trying to figure out when to schedule these fun moments, look at an interval of about every 90-120 minutes. This is because there's something called the ultradian rhythm. Now you may have heard of the circadian rhythm, how we work and sleep throughout the day.

But the ultradian rhythm says that, roughly every 90-120 minutes, we need a break. There's a maximum amount of performance that we can get during that time, until we need to refresh ourselves. So try to find a couple of places in your day, where you can schedule these small breaks. Then, after you enjoy that little fun activity each day, take note on its impact on your performance in the hours afterward. I believe you will find, as my coaching clients and many others have found, that your performance will experience a significant uptick.

There's actually a lot of hard research behind this phenomenon, but for now, be your own scientist, and confirm it with your own experiment. Second, after you've experienced the power of having fun for yourself, begin encouraging your team members to test it out, as well. Especially do this if you see their performance start to falter due to fatigue. Again, the idea is to encourage them to take a brief, five to 15 minute break, to do something that's purely fun and recreational.

While you can suggest something if nothing comes to their mind, make sure it's their choice, though, and not yours, this will have greater impact for them. When you try these two experiments, I believe you will see the same result that I see each week in my coaching clients. Continuing to push past the point of boredom and fatigue results in decreased performance over time, as much as a 50 percent drop in output. However, a 10 minute, fun, harmless diversion, regardless of whether it's active, like running, or passive, like watching a video, can restore a person's functionality to near 100 percent.

Would you rather a team member work for another two hours at 50 percent capacity, or would you rather have them take a 10 minute break to do something fun and frivolous, and then return to 100 percent capacity, for 110 minutes? Now if what I'm suggesting is against the norm of how things are done at your company, conduct this as a personal case study. Measure your progress and performance, then share your results with your supervisors.

Few people want to put their neck on the line for your wonderful little test. They need evidence. Consider this your opportunity to test the power of having fun, with your team.
CONCLUSION 
Next Step
- We have reached the end of our journey together. My hope is that you've taken away several specific actions you can implement immediately to improve your time management as a manager. The shorter the distance between you learning something and you taking action upon it, the more successful you'll become. So I recommend you schedule a time in your calendar soon to complete any of those specific actions that came to your mind as you went through this course. Also, as I mentioned at the beginning, if you've not yet completed my Time Management Fundamentals course, now is the time to dive in.

Couple what you learn here with the proven principles of that course. If you've already completed both of these courses, consider making my Time Management Tips course a part of your weekly training routine as well. If you have any questions, you're welcome to ask me at davecrenshaw.com/ask. Thank you for watching, and I wish you success as a manager and an abundance of time.
